Supporting
Royal family
Ren Min as Zhao Huirou
 Zhao Zhen's beloved daughter Princess Fukang. She is unable to deal with the suffocating atmosphere in the Princess manor, where Li resides as well, and develops romantic affection towards her eunuch Huaiji. Refusing to swallow the insults from her in-laws, she charges back to the palace one night with the help of Huaiji, and her rebellious actions lead to an uproar in the government.
 Wu Yue as Liu E
 The dowager Empress and regent of the empire for twelve years. She's the emperor adopted mother. She sincerely loves him but knows their relationship remains cold and cordial.
 Wang Churan as Noble Consort Zhang
 Her real name is Zhang Bihan. She is one of the best dancers in the palace and met Zhao Zhen as a child and fell in love with him ever since - even though the emperor had forgotten. She isn't adjusted to the life of the harem and grows paranoid, convinced that everyone is against her. All of her daughters passed away at a young age, and her mental health is affected greatly. 
 Xu Lingyue as Lady Miao, Noble Consort Miao
 Birth name: Miao Xin He. The mother of Zhao Huirou and Zhao Zuigxinglai, and the childhood lover of Zhao Zhen. She only cares about her children's well-being while also developing a rivalry with Zhang Bihan. She's a close friend of the empress.
 Lu Yanqi as Lady Dong
at first a maid named Lantiao. She's responsible for indirectly causing the death of Bihan eldest daughter. She holds a grudge against Nanny Gu and is jealous of her favouritism over Bihan rather than her. However, she ends up reconciling with Nanny Gu who later kill her while pregnant of the emperor child.
 Liu Zihe as Lady Yu
Lady Miao's friend, she despises Zhang Bihan.
 Wang Yuchao as Emperor Yingzong of Song
 Yang Yue as Empress Gao
 an outspoken and fierce woman, she was chosen by the dowager empress to become the empress. She sincerely loves the emperor but her hot-headed temperament leads her to palace tricks and to her deposal. She mysteriously dies shortly after returning to the emperor's good grace.
 Xiao Yifen as Ninth Princess
 Qian Jin as Tenth Princess
 Zhao Da as Zhao Yuanyan
The adopted son of the Empress, a member of the imperial clan. He was Huirou's childhood companion and friend.
 Kang Qunzhi as Princess of Wei
 Lu Xing as Li Wei
 Princess Fukang's husband.