Event
Jepara held several events every year, it is:
 Festival Kartini
is event celebrate the Anniversary Jepara memorial and commemoration of Kartini Day . Festival Kartini is a tradition in the show on the month of April. If we want to go there, we can use private car. 
 Pesta Lomban
is sea alms ceremony in the form of offerings buffalo head that floated in the sea Jepara, So that swept away the buffalo head eaten by fish. Pesta Lomban is as an expression of gratitude to God. Therefore, with the Lomban giving alms or feed the fish, it can foster a sense of caring for the environment and that fishermen are not greedy with the dredge as much natural wealth, especially the sea. Pesta Lomban is a tradition in the show on the 7th month of Shawwal. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  
 Pesta Baratan
is carnival traditions Impes (traditional lanterns Kalinyamat) in the show on the 15th of Sha'ban. The word "baratan" comes from an Arabic word, which is "baraah" which means salvation or "barakah" meaning blessing. Tradition Pesta Baratan arranged by theme cavalcade Queen Kalinyamat and his troops holding Impes and Torch. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  
 Festival Oncor 
is a tradition convoy in the show on the evening of the 10th month of Dhu al-Hijjah. Festival brings Oncor Oncor participants with a variety of themes and designs, participants carried Oncor There also were carrying traditional Oncor unique design. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  
 Perang Obor
is a battle using coconut fronds that have been dried and the inside is filled with dried banana leaves. Torches are lit together have available to use as a tool to attack each other so that frequent collisions that could result in the glowing torch-flames were huge, which gave rise to the name of the torch War. If we want to go there, we can use private car. 
 Memeden Gadhu Festival
is a tradition convoy scarecrow. Memeden Gadhu Festival held in the Kepuk village. Participants wore peasant costumes and traditional Javanese clothes, bring tumpeng and scarecrows various forms. If we want to go there, we can use private car.   
 Festival Jondang
is the parade bring jondang containing food and agricultural products is a tradition bachelor application to a virgin girl to get to the wedding. Before the parade began, people first offered by traditional crafts. only then one by one the participants paraded the creations jondang to punden Mbah Kawak. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  
 Jembul Tulakan
is jembul parade in the village Tulakan. Jembul is in the form of parts of bamboo are parsed as thin as a hair. Parts of bamboo gathered with other grain as an offering. Jembul Tulakan ceremony is an expression of gratitude to God. If we want to go there, we can use private car.   
 Jembul Bedekah
is jembul parade in the village Banyumanis. Jembul is in the form of parts of bamboo are parsed as thin as a hair. Parts of bamboo gathered with other grain as an offering. Jembul Bedekah ceremony is an expression of gratitude to God. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  
 Barikan
is a form of expression of gratitude and sharing with fellow creatures of God's creation in the sea Karimunjava. To that end, the cone does not only produce, but also from the sea. If we want to go there, we can use private car.  < 
 Jepara Thongtek Carnival
is parade in which participants no use kentongan, gong, bedug, gendang, gamelan, angklung, trumpet. Parade participants shouting yells "sahur... sahur...," Parade participants also uses an interesting costume. Jepara Thongtek Carnival is a tradition convoy in the show on the evening of the month of Ramadhan. If we want to go there, we can use private car.   
 Jepara Bedug Festival is a parade in which participants use Bedug while Takbir peal. Jepara Bedug Festival  is a traditional convoy in the show on the evening of the 1st month of Shawwal. If we want to go there, we can use private car.